USHIFT-2188: introduce microshift API Custom certs (#1541)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/microshift/microshift-apiserver-custom-certs.md

api-approvers:
  - N/A
creation-date: 2021-01-18
last-updated: 2023-01-18
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/USHIFT-2101
see-also:
  - microshift-apiserver-certs.md
replaces:
  - N/A
superseded-by:
  - N/A
---

# MicroShift API server custom external certificates
## Summary

This enhancement extends the Microshift apiserver Certs to allow the user to
configure the use of client certificates for api server external TLS access.

> Anytime the document mentions API server, it refers to kube API server.

## Motivation
Currently, users of Microshift cannot provide their own generated certificates,
Some customers have very strict requirements regarding TLS certs. There are frequently intermediate proxies which allow only TLS traffic with certs that are signed by organization owned CAs.

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift administrator/user, I want to be able to add  my organization generated certificates.

### Goals
* Allow server TLS authentication using  customer certifactes  of IP address and
domain names.

### Non-Goals
N/A

## Proposal
Proposal suggests to provide Administrator means adding their own Certificates using microshift configuration file.

> Those certificate will override the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) configuration.

Author: well it depends, if we are use the same SNI the namecerts   will be overriden . see this [line](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/pull/2892/files#diff-a7e1b99d8d3ce64dc3d1ce0673a64e767a0a7926ca5feebd3d1ff51da7ef35c5R145) in  POC PR.

> Those certificate will override the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) configuration.

Reviewer: Part of the goal of this doc is to explain the expected behavior so that docs and QE can plan their work around it. If you update this part of the doc explaining how the precedence is handled that will help them.

### Workflow Description

### Implementation Details
introduce new optional `namedCertificates` under apiServer configuration fields:

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:

>   - name: api_fqdn_1:     

Author: good point, it should  be optional field and support more then one in the list.

>   - name: api_fqdn_1:     

Author: fixed

each certification will be validated (see validation rules).

The certs will be appended to the []configv1.NamedCertificate list before the api server is started. (it will be added to `-tls-sni-cert-key` flag)

### API Extensions
N/A

### Risks and Mitigations
* User provide incorrect/expired certificate.
* User provided Certificate expired and causes API service disruption.

### Drawbacks
See risks above.

## Design Details
N/A

### Open Questions [optional]
N/A

### Test Plan
add e2e test that will:
- generate and sign certificates with custom ca.
- change the default Microshift configuration to use the newly generated certs.
- make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

### Graduation Criteria
#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Gather feedback from early adopters on possible issues.

#### Tech Preview -> GA
- Extensive testing with various certificates variations.

#### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
N/A

### Version Skew Strategy
N/A

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions
N/A

#### Failure Modes
N/A

#### Support Procedures
N/A

## Implementation History
N/A

## Alternatives

> - use cert-manager for managing Microshift external custom certs

Author: well for my best knowledge cert-manager is for managing certs inside k8s clusters, so its requires a working API server.

> - use cert-manager for managing Microshift external custom certs

Reviewer: OK, it would be good to capture that in the document for future readers.

> Anytime the document mentions API server, it refers to kube API server.

## Motivation
Currently, users of Microshift cannot provide their own generated certificates,
Some customers have very strict requirements regarding TLS certs. There are frequently intermediate proxies which allow only TLS traffic with certs that are signed by organization owned CAs.

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to add  organization generated certificates.
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate.

### Goals
* Allow MicroShift administrator to configure Microshift with externally generated certificates and
domain names.

### Non-Goals
N/A

## Proposal
Proposal suggests to provide Administrator means adding their own Certificates using microshift configuration file.

A new `apiServer` level section will be added to the configuration called `namedCertificates`:

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.key
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.key
    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     

>     - *.apps.external.com

Reviewer 2: If users specify DNS names which are aliased by existing cluster certs (e.g. those used by the default external serving cert), would that cause problems?

Author: yes, as it does for OCP :)

Reviewer: This case should be included in the test plan section.

```  
For each provided certificate, the following configuration is proposed:
1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
   If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.
1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,
each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

### Workflow Description

#### Default API Certs

> 1. by default when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

Reviewer 2: By default, when there is no `namedCertificates`...

#### when custom namedCertificates configured

> 1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host

Reviewer 3: Which permissions do the files need?

Author: since microshift is run by a root functionally permissions not  a real problem. maybe security wise ?

Author: added that  the files should be accessible by root only.

1. Device Administrator configures `namedCertificates` in the Microshift configuration yaml file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).
1. Device Administrator start/restarts MicroShift

> 1. During startup the certifates paths will be checked and validated. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and exit.

Reviewer 2: This comment conflicts with your statement in the risks section, where you say that expired certs will be logged and accepted instead of exiting.

Author: yes, in case one of the provided cert files is  missing  Microshift will exit , but we do allow expired certs.

> 1. Certifates will be passed to the tls-sni-cert-key command line flag preceding all the other certificates.

Reviewer 2: Certificates will ...

1. kube-apiserver picks up the certificates and start serving them on the configured SNI.

### Implementation Details

The certs will be prepended to the []configv1.NamedCertificate list before the api server is started. (it will be added to `-tls-sni-cert-key` flag)

this certification paths configuration and names will be prepended into the kube-apiserver `tls-sni-cert-key` command line flag.
when same SNI appear in the CN part of the provided certs,this certificate will take precedence over the `default` external-signer. [ref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/98358b8ce11b0c1878ae7aa1482668cb7a0b0e23/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/dynamiccertificates/named_certificates.go#L38)

### API Extensions
N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

> * User provide incorrect/expired certificate.

Author: example of incorrect:
contains SNI of : localhost or 127.0.0.1
in such case we want to fail early and produce error (or it will crash down the line with out clear message)

  kube-api server will continue serving with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

* User provided expired Certificate and Microshift service started/restarted 

>   Microshift will start with a warning in the logs,kube-api will continue serve with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

Reviewer 2: I think that we should have an option for security conscious users which would configure microshift to not start when the certs provided are invalid (e.g. when they've been revoked, expired, etc.).

Author: so will adding flag like `allow_invalid_certificate`  globally for all the NameCerts will work  ?

Reviewer: We'll want it to be an enum, rather than a boolean. What are the options? Something like:

* Run using expired certs
* Run but do not use expired certs (so only the self-signed certs are used)
* Refuse to run

Are there other behaviors?

What should be the default?

Author: custom-certificates only affect on how users access the  API  server externally (using oc client),so it shouldn't affect any internal functionality nor  cause any data loss.

Author: @dhellmann , @jerpeter1  i've added the new configuration option `InvalidCertificatesPolicy` , PTAL

Reviewer: We'll want more text explaining what the valid values of that new configuration setting are, how it maps to the OpenShift API for doing validation, etc.

Reviewer: I'll resolve this thread, since the text it's discussing has been removed.

  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

### Drawbacks
* External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 
  similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

## Design Details
N/A

### Open Questions [optional]
- How to handle kubeconfig generation for NamedCerts?

### Test Plan
add e2e test that will:
- generate and sign certificates with custom ca.
- change the default Microshift configuration to use the newly generated certs.
- make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

### Graduation Criteria
#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Gather feedback from early adopters on possible issues.

#### Tech Preview -> GA
- Extensive testing with various certificates variations.

#### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
N/A

### Version Skew Strategy
N/A

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions
N/A

#### Failure Modes

> the provided certs value will be validated before is it passed to the api-server flag

Author: api-server will validate if the certificate is signed by a `known` authority and produce an error if not , not sure we need to add additional configuration for that .

> this check will prevent Microshift service from starting:

Reviewer 2: This check ...

1. certificates files exists in the disk and readable by microshift process.
1. certificates shouldnt override the internal local certificates which are managed internally.

this check display warning message at the log and service will be started:
1. certificates is expired.

#### Support Procedures

> configured certs value are prepended to the  `tls-sni-cert-key`  TLS handshake command line flag  which is passed to the kube-apiserver:

Reviewer 2: Configured certs values to the `tls-sni-cert-key` TLS handshake command line flag which...

Jan 24 14:53:00 localhost.localdomain microshift[45313]: kube-apiserver I0124 14:53:00.649099   45313 flags.go:64] FLAG: --tls-sni-cert-key="[/home/eslutsky/dev/certs/server.crt,/home/eslutsky/dev/certs/server.key;/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-external-signer/kube-external-serving/server.crt,/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-external-signer/kube-external-serving/server.key;/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-localhost-signer/kube-apiserver-localhost-serving/server.crt,/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-localhost-signer/kube-apiserver-localhost-serving/server.key;/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-service-network-signer/kube-apiserver-service-network-serving/server.crt,/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-service-network-signer/kube-apiserver-service-network-serving/server.key
```

Connecting to API server using external SNI yields external certificate.
   ```shell
   $ openssl s_client -connect <SNI_ADDRESS>:6443 -showcerts | openssl x509 -text -noout -in - | grep -C 1 "Alternative\|CN"
   ```

## Implementation History
N/A

## Alternatives
- Use cert-manager for managing Microshift external custom certs
  - Benifits

>     1. will allow Microshift Administrator create automatic Certificate rotation strategy using supported protocols  (ie: ACME Webhook)

Reviewer 2: Will allow MicroShift administrators to rotate certificates automatically (e.g. via ACME)

  - Drawbacks

>     1. cert-manager is for managing certs inside k8s clusters. (its not designed for kube-api certs which is based on files.)

Reviewer 2: This is inaccurate. One of cert-manager's documented use-cases is to provide access to apiserver using 3rd party certs: https://docs.google.com/document/d/10eC-AWFRnzdCzkbYNDBOvlObYdjG2jiCr4wUKVrEGqE/edit

It's immaterial whether or not the certs provided to secure apiserver's primary endpoint are provided as files, as it does not affect other means of exposing the endpoint as documented in the aforementioned documentation.

Author: it does require that the API server will be managed by  [kube-apiserver](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-kube-apiserver-operator)   , which currently is not the case of Microshift. it sounds like a very big architecture change .

>     1. cert-managed will introduce additional load (CPU/Memory) into Microshift Node.

Reviewer 2: If avoiding CPU/RAM is an important consideration, then it should be mentioned in the goals section of this document we can make sure that we meet those requirements in our testing.

---
title: microshift-apiserver-custom-certs
authors:
  - "@eslutsky"
reviewers:
  - "@jerpeter, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@pacevedom, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@ggiguash, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@benluddy, OpenShift API server team"
  - "@standa, OpenShift Auth Team"

approvers:
  - "@jerpeter"
api-approvers:
  - N/A
creation-date: 2021-01-18
last-updated: 2023-01-18
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/USHIFT-2101
see-also:
  - microshift-apiserver-certs.md
replaces:
  - N/A
superseded-by:
  - N/A
---

# MicroShift API server custom external certificates
## Summary

This enhancement extends the Microshift apiserver Certs to allow the user to

> configure the use of client certificates for api server external TLS access.

Reviewer 2: The use of the term "client certificate" here is confusing. We're allowing users to provide their own certs/keys (e.g. signed by a 3rd party CA) for authenticating the API server, not certs/keys for authenticating the client to the cluster).

> Anytime the document mentions API server, it refers to kube API server.

## Motivation
Currently, users of Microshift cannot provide their own generated certificates,
Some customers have very strict requirements regarding TLS certs. There are frequently intermediate proxies which allow only TLS traffic with certs that are signed by organization owned CAs.

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to add  organization generated certificates.
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate.
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to remove organization generated certificates.
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to remove DNS names for each certificate.

### Goals
* Allow MicroShift administrator to configure Microshift with externally generated certificates and
domain names.

### Non-Goals
N/A

## Proposal
Proposal suggests to provide Administrator means adding their own Certificates using microshift configuration file.

> a new `apiServer` level section will be added to the configuration called `namedCertificates`:

Reviewer 2: A new `apiServer`...

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.key
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.key
    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     
    - *.apps.external.com

```  

> for each provided certificate, The following configuration is proposed:

Reviewer 2: For each provided certificate, the following...

1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).

>    If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.

Reviewer 4: From user stories:
> * As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate.
> * As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to remove DNS names for each certificate.

Just want to make sure: whatever is given in the `names` will completely overwrite names from the cert? So if someone wants to add something, they will need to include names already existing in the cert, and if they want to remove single name, they will need to provide everything but that name?

Author: no it wont overwrite,  it will be in additional to the names in the Cert, so both check will apply .
so its not possible to remove names from within the certs ..

Author: by `remove DNS names` i meant removing it from the `names` entries, maybe its misleading statement that we support removing DNS names ..

Reviewer 4: Ah, you meant list in the config: `apiServer.namedCertificates[].names`?
If that's the case then I think user stories are a bit misleading.

Author: yeap . i'll remove it then

1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

> certificate files will be read from their conifgured location by the Microshift service,

Reviewer 2: Certificate files will be read from their configured...

each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

> Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

Reviewer 2: Do we intend to allow self-signed certs to be provided? How about certs signed by public trust chains? Since we're not providing configuration for specifying the CA separately, are we requiring that the trust chain is appended to the certs that are provided by customers (e.g. so that we can populate the certificate-authority-data in a new kubeconfig?)

Author: well originally it was discussed removing certificate-authority-data from generated  custom kubeconfig altogether, 
so the Certs  will be validated against CAs that in the RHEL trust. customer can add certificate-authority-data manually if they want.

Author: added to proposal and the workflow  sections

### API Extensions
N/A

### Risks and Mitigations
* User provide incorrect/expired certificate.
  kube-api server will continue serving with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

* User provided expired Certificate and Microshift service started/restarted 
  Microshift will start with a warning in the logs,kube-api will continue serve with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

### Drawbacks
* External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 
  similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

## Design Details
N/A

### Open Questions [optional]
N/A

### Test Plan
add e2e test that will:
- generate and sign certificates with custom ca.
- change the default Microshift configuration to use the newly generated certs.

> - make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

Author: its infeasible to generate kubeconfig for every provided option in NameCert (we also support wildcards ie)
IMO  Microshift should generate one kubeconfig for all the ,without `certificate-authority-data`,
it might be in-accurate kubeconfig (since its hard to guess the SNI..) or just document how to change the kubeconfig manually .

> - make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

Reviewer 2: Not verifying the validity of the server cert (omitting `certificate-authority-data`) is almost as bad as connecting with `--insecure-skip-tls-verify`. It exposes the connection to MitM attacks. Additionally, I don't think that someone who is taking the trouble to specify their own cert for securing the apiserver will be interested in permanently ignoring cert validation.

> - make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

Author: from my experiments omitting certificate-authority-data from the kubeconfig will  cause the `oc` client to  use  the  operating system  trusted CAs ( from RHEL trustore)  (instead specifying the exact CA).  so it disables nothing.

> - make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

Author: Ii've  performed similar experiment with regular OCP cluster, documented it [here.](https://gist.github.com/eslutsky/898a034e3da043ad013bcfbcdb911705)

each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

because we dont want to disrupt the internal API communication and make sure the internal certificate will be automaticly renewed,
Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

The generated `kubeconfig` for the custom certificates will omit the certificate-authority-data section,
therefore custom certificates will have to be validated against CAs in the RHEL trust store. 

For every certificate that contain `names` the first non-wildcard `name`  will be used,
and placed inside the `server` section of the generated `kubeconfig`.

Certain values that configured in `names` field can cause  internal API communication issues  ie:127.0.0.1,localhost we must not allow them.

### Workflow Description

#### Default API Certs
1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

#### when custom namedCertificates configured
1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host

> 1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL trust store.

Reviewer: Is that the trust store on the MicroShift host, or on the client host?

Author: the client  who  is connecting to the API Server. (ie: where the oc command is run)

1. Device Administrator configures `namedCertificates` in the Microshift configuration yaml file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).
1. Device Administrator start/restarts MicroShift

> 1. During startup the certifates paths will be checked and validated. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and if the file is missing it will exit.

Reviewer: nit: typo

```suggestion
1. During startup the certifcates' paths will be checked and validated. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and if the file is missing it will exit.
```

> 1. During startup the certifates paths will be checked and validated. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and if the file is missing it will exit.

Reviewer 5: Besides checking for "file exists", what other validation should MicroShift do? Should MicroShift enforce strict access permissions on the files (e.g. 0400) or leave that to the user?

* User provide certificate and it expired after some time.
  kube-api server will continue serving with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

* User provided expired Certificate and Microshift service started/restarted 
  Microshift will start with a warning in the logs,kube-api will continue serve with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

### Drawbacks
* External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 
  similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

## Design Details
N/A

## Open Questions [optional]
- How to handle kubeconfig generation for NamedCerts?

## Test Plan
add e2e test that will:
- generate and sign certificates with custom ca.
- change the default Microshift configuration to use the newly generated certs.
- make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.

## Graduation Criteria
### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Gather feedback from early adopters on possible issues.

### Tech Preview -> GA

> - Extensive testing with various certificates variations.

Reviewer: Documentation should be in this list

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to add  organization generated certificates. 
  - each certificate may contain:
    - Single Common Name containing The API server DNS/IPAddress.
    - Multiple Subject Alternative Names (SAN) containing the API server DNS/IPAddress.

* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate.

### Goals
* Allow MicroShift administrator to configure Microshift with externally generated certificates and
domain names.

### Non-Goals
N/A

## Proposal
Proposal suggests to provide Administrator means adding their own Certificates using microshift configuration file.

A new `apiServer` level section will be added to the configuration called `namedCertificates`:

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.key
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.key
    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     
    - *.apps.external.com

```  
For each provided certificate, the following configuration is proposed:

> 1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
>    If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.

Reviewer 4: Previously I got impression `names` would be added to what's already in the certificate, is it still the plan?
```suggestion
1. `names` - optional list of additional DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
   If no additional names are provided, only names extracted from the certificates will be used.
```

Author: yes , the provided names will be applied to the Certificate  in additional to its field content.

Author: @copejon , see my comment here https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1541#discussion_r1498113574

1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,
each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

because we dont want to disrupt the internal API communication and make sure the internal certificate will be automaticly renewed,
Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

The generated `kubeconfig` for the custom certificates will omit the certificate-authority-data section,
therefore custom certificates will have to be validated against CAs in the RHEL trust store. 

For every certificate that contain `names` the first non-wildcard `name`  will be used,

> and placed inside the `server` section of the generated `kubeconfig`.

Reviewer 4: I might be missing something here about certs, but what happens when `names` are given and certificates has its own name/SANs - are the lists merged with non-wildcard names being on the top?

Author: so we can  use CN as unique identifier for the `server` section of generated kubeconfig.
in such case kubeconfigs wont be generated for wild-card certificates.

Reviewer: It seems like if the certificate has a wildcard but the user gives us a more specific name, we could generate the kubeconfig for that name. That's similar to what happens with the certs we generate, if they give us a SAN, right?

Author: currently if the user give us a SAN ,then we generate external Certs with that SAN.

I've made more experiments with names,  configured  a `name`  (ie: nameonly.com ) that is not  in the Certificate CN  (nor contained in the wildcard), 
and  placed that `name` in kubeconfig under `server` :
`server: https://nameonly.com:6443/`

what happen is that the  oc client rejected that `server` (since it doesnt appear in the actual certificate)
```
Unable to connect to the server: tls: failed to verify certificate: x509: certificate is valid for api.example.com, localhost.localdomain, 192.168.2.130, not nameonly.com
```

so names are only useful if combined with wildcards inside the cert. (wildcard certs)
for cases when the Certificate is created for multiple nodes and there is need  to specify that specific node node.

Reviewer: That makes sense, and that's the case I was trying to describe. When the cert has `*.example.com` and the config file has `my-host.example.com`, we should generate a kubeconfig with a server URL pointing to `my-host.example.com`.  If the user gives us only the cert with the wildcard `*.example.com` then I think we said the other day in the team meeting that we would generate a kubeconfig with the server URL using the FQDN of the host.

Author: @dhellmann , see my [0]  commit , i've added the meeting outcome there [0] https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1541/commits/1c92195c26040867f8a9c537557114c5a7eb682b

Certain values that configured in `names` field can cause  internal API communication issues  ie:127.0.0.1,localhost we must not allow them.

### Workflow Description

#### Default API Certs
1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

#### when custom namedCertificates configured
1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host

> 1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL Client trust store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL Client trust store on the client system.
```

1. Device Administrator configures `namedCertificates` in the Microshift configuration yaml file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).
1. Device Administrator start/restarts MicroShift

> 1. During startup the certificates paths will be checked and validated. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and if the file is missing it will exit.

Reviewer: Rephrasing this in active voice makes it clear what is doing the work.

```suggestion
1. During startup, microshift will check and validate the certificates paths. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and if the file is missing it will exit.
```

> 1. Certificates will be passed to the tls-sni-cert-key as apiserver command line option preceding all the other certificates.

Reviewer: Active voice again

```suggestion
1. Microsoft passes the certificates to the tls-sni-cert-key as apiserver command line option preceding all the other certificates.
```

This says specifically "preceding", does the order matter? Maybe it sets the lookup precedence?

Author: yes the order matters, since we want the custom certs to be served first on the same SNI (since we also  may generate external cert for  that SNI)

  - "@pacevedom, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@ggiguash, MicroShift contributor"
  - "@benluddy, OpenShift API server team"
  - "@standa, OpenShift Auth Team"

approvers:
  - "@jerpeter"
api-approvers:
  - N/A
creation-date: 2021-01-18
last-updated: 2023-01-18
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/USHIFT-2101
see-also:
  - microshift-apiserver-certs.md
replaces:
  - N/A
superseded-by:
  - N/A
---

# MicroShift API server custom external certificates
## Summary

This enhancement extends the Microshift apiserver Certs to allow the user to
provide additional custom certificates (e.g. signed by a 3rd party CA) for API server SSL handkshake and external authentication.

> Anytime the document mentions API server, it refers to kube API server.

## Motivation
Currently, users of Microshift cannot provide their own generated certificates,
Some customers have very strict requirements regarding TLS certs. There are frequently intermediate proxies which allow only TLS traffic with certs that are signed by organization owned CAs.

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to add  organization generated certificates. 

>   - each certificate may contain:

Author: well there are many combination of certs , and its dictated by the organization policy.
from Microshift operational  perspective  it shouldn't contain any `internal` values, its covered in the risk and mitigation parts of the document.

>     - Single Common Name containing The API server DNS/IPAddress or a wildcard entry (wildcard certificate).

Author: yes, custom  certificate may contain other FQDN , as long as it can be trusted and resolvable by the client running the `oc`  command.

>     - Single Common Name containing The API server DNS/IPAddress or a wildcard entry (wildcard certificate).

Reviewer: @ShaunaDiaz I don't understand your question. Can you restate it? What are you trying to understand about the SCN field?

>     - Single Common Name containing The API server DNS/IPAddress or a wildcard entry (wildcard certificate).

Reviewer 6: @dhellmann I'm wondering what the limits are on entries to this field and if anything about those need to be noted to users.

>     - Single Common Name containing The API server DNS/IPAddress or a wildcard entry (wildcard certificate).

Reviewer: OK, @eslutsky is describing here that MicroShift will work with certificates that have fully qualified domain names for hosts (`"myhost.example.com"`) or wildcard entries (`"*.example.com"`). The "API server" reference is there because these certificates are only used when accessing the API server, not workloads running on the cluster. The different types of entries are only relevant because MicroShift will generate different kubeconfig files based on which is used, but it does not validate the inputs in any way. Whether a name is "valid" depends on the context the client is in when it makes the request (which DNS server, what's in `/etc/hosts`, etc.) so the only way to know for sure that it works is for the client to make the request. For the docs, we should just explain that both kinds of names are allowed and talk about the kubeconfig files.

    - Multiple Subject Alternative Names (SAN) containing the API server DNS/IPAddress.

* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate (in the Microshift config).

### Goals
* Allow MicroShift administrator to configure Microshift with externally generated certificates and
domain names.

### Non-Goals

> Automatic certificate rotation and integration with 3rd party cert issuing services.

Author: no we dont support automatic rotation for custom Certificates,so its a non-goal.

> Automatic certificate rotation and integration with 3rd party cert issuing services.

Reviewer: Users would have to update the certificates, then restart MicroShift to have it pick them up.

1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,
each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

because we dont want to disrupt the internal API communication and make sure the internal certificate will be automaticly renewed,
Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

### Kubeconfig Generation
Each configured certificate can contain multiple FQDN and wildcards values, for each unique FQDN address kubeconfig file will be generated on the filesystem.

Every generated `kubeconfig` for the custom certificates will omit the certificate-authority-data section,
therefore custom certificates will have to be validated against CAs in the RHEL Client trust store. 

each certificate will be examined and deteremined if its wildcard only.
certificate will be considered as a wildcard only if there are no FQDN Entries found.
the FQDN Address is searched in:
- Certificate CN
- Certificate Subject Alternative Name (SAN)
- names configuration value.

> when a Certificate is found to be a wildcard only, Microshift will not be able to find the real FQDN, node IP Address will be placed inside its kubeconfig's `server` section.

Author: this covers a use-case when a single certificate issued for multiple nodes (wild card), so we cannot require to be specific in the Custom Cert.

> this kubeconfig should be treated as an example only and its `server` section value should be changed to the real FQDN.

Author: well if a user will try to use that `kubeconfig` , the `oc` command will show tls verify error  (the client will probably hit the self-generated cert,which is not trusted )

> Certain values that configured in `names` field can cause  internal API communication issues  ie:127.0.0.1,localhost therefore we must not allow them.

Author: i will make it more clear which values are forbidden

### Workflow Description

#### Default API Certs

> 1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

Author: kubeconfigs directory will be regenerated each service restart, so it should be deleted.

> 1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

Reviewer: Do we delete kubeconfig files under any circumstances today?

cc @pacevedom

> 1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

Author: @dhellmann , yes we [remove](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/cmd/init.go#L521) stale kubeconfigs which are not needed.

> 1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

Reviewer: ACK, thanks for clarifying

#### when custom namedCertificates configured
1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host,files should be accessible by root only.

> 1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL Client trust store on the client system.

Reviewer: The client is expected to be on a host other than the one where MicroShift is running, so it won't necessarily be a RHEL for Edge image, right @eslutsky ? It doesn't even need to technically be RHEL.

> 1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL Client trust store on the client system.

Author: yes, but we can provide instructions for RHEL.

The certs will be prepended to the []configv1.NamedCertificate list before the api server is started. (it will be added to `-tls-sni-cert-key` flag)

this certification paths configuration and names will be prepended into the kube-apiserver `tls-sni-cert-key` command line flag.
when same SNI appear in the CN part of the provided certs,this certificate will take precedence over the `default` external-signer. [ref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/98358b8ce11b0c1878ae7aa1482668cb7a0b0e23/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/dynamiccertificates/named_certificates.go#L38)

### API Extensions
N/A

### Risks and Mitigations
* User provide certificate and it expired after some time.
  kube-api server will continue serving with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

* User provided expired Certificate and Microshift service started/restarted 
  Microshift will start with a warning in the logs,kube-api will continue serve with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.
  > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

> * Users might configure certs with the wrong names that doesnt match the certificate SAN,but openShift allows it so we will too.

Reviewer: We don't want to diverge from the OCP experience.

### Drawbacks

> * External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 

Author: since we dont have console .. only Microshift logs..

> * External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 

Reviewer: It's the user's responsibility to manage these custom certificates. I would expect the tools they use to manage certificates across their organization to help them keep up with any that are likely to be expiring soon.

domain names.

### Non-Goals
Automatic certificate rotation and integration with 3rd party cert issuing services.

## Proposal
Proposal suggests to provide Administrator means adding their own Certificates using microshift configuration file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).

A new `apiServer` level section will be added to the configuration called `namedCertificates`:

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.key
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.key
    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     
    - *.apps.external.com

```  
For each provided certificate, the following configuration is proposed:
1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
   If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.
1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,
each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

> Because we dont want to disrupt the internal API communication and make sure the internal certificate will be automaticly renewed,

Author: simplified

Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

Certificate will be validated and treated according to [Failure Modes](#failure-modes).

### Kubeconfig Generation
Each configured certificate can contain multiple FQDN and wildcards values, for each unique FQDN address kubeconfig file will be generated on the filesystem.

Every generated `kubeconfig` for the custom certificates will omit the certificate-authority-data section,
therefore custom certificates will have to be validated against CAs in the RHEL Client trust store. 

each certificate will be examined and deteremined if its wildcard only.
certificate will be considered as a wildcard only if there are no FQDN Entries found.

> the FQDN Address is searched in:

Author: I'm looking for the wildcard  character (*.) Value inside the CN and SANs DNS portion.

> the FQDN Address is searched in:

Author: added explanation  about wildcard cert

- Certificate CN
- Certificate Subject Alternative Name (SAN)
- names configuration value.

> when a Certificate is found to be a wildcard only, Microshift will not be able to find the real FQDN, node IP Address will be placed inside its kubeconfig's `server` section.

Reviewer: @stlaz you and @eslutsky are using different terminology. Are you talking about the same thing? Are you saying that if a cert _only_ has wildcard names then it's not valid?

> when a Certificate is found to be a wildcard only, Microshift will not be able to find the real FQDN, node IP Address will be placed inside its kubeconfig's `server` section.

Author: @dhellmann ,  
according to the [rfc](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2818.txt) in context of `wildcard`
>  If a subjectAltName extension of type dNSName is present, that MUST
>    be used as the identity. Otherwise, the (most specific) Common Name
>    field in the Subject field of the certificate MUST be used. Although
>    the use of the Common Name is existing practice, it is deprecated and
>    Certification Authorities are encouraged to use the dNSName instead.
> 
>    Matching is performed using the matching rules specified by
>    [RFC2459].  If more than one identity of a given type is present in
>    the certificate (e.g., more than one dNSName name, a match in any one
>    of the set is considered acceptable.) Names may contain the wildcard
>    character * which is considered to match any single domain name
>    component or component fragment. E.g., *.a.com matches foo.a.com but
>    not bar.foo.a.com. f*.com matches foo.com but not bar.com.
> 

so  like @stlaz says , we should avoid using CN  since its deprecated ,
so we should only using the DNS  which is part  of the SAN.

> when a Certificate is found to be a wildcard only, Microshift will not be able to find the real FQDN, node IP Address will be placed inside its kubeconfig's `server` section.

Reviewer: OK, what wasn't clear to me is you were talking about different fields in the certificate. If it's important that we treat the fields differently, please put that detail in the body of the enhancement.

- make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.
- intentionally configure invalid value in `names` (ie: 127.0.0.1,localhost) , Microshift should ignore this configuration and skip this certificate.

## Graduation Criteria
### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Gather feedback from early adopters on possible issues.

### Tech Preview -> GA
- Extensive testing with various certificates variations.
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
N/A

## Version Skew Strategy
N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions
N/A

### Failure Modes
The provided certs value will be validated before is it passed to the api-server flag

This check will cause Microshift to ignore certificates and log the error:
1. certificates files exists in the disk and readable by microshift process.
1. certificate should be parseable by[x509.ParseCertificate](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509#ParseCertificate).
1. certificates shouldnt override the internal local certificates which are managed internally.

> This check display warning message at the log and certificate will served by the api-server:

Author: corrected

1. certificates is expired.

## Support Procedures

> Configured certs values to the tls-sni-cert-key TLS handshake command line flag which is passed to the kube-apiserver:

Author: corrected

```

Connecting to API server using external SNI yields external certificate.
   ```shell
   $ openssl s_client -connect <SNI_ADDRESS>:6443 -showcerts | openssl x509 -text -noout -in - | grep -C 1 "Alternative\|CN"
   ```

## Implementation History
N/A

## Alternatives
- Use [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/) for managing Microshift external custom certs
 which allow MicroShift administrators to rotate certificates automatically (e.g. via ACME)

>  cert-manager is not supported on Microshift because it requires alot of internal API changes.

Reviewer 7: This should be two sentences.

Not sure I buy the reasoning but I'll bite.

### Goals
* Allow MicroShift administrator to configure Microshift with externally generated certificates and
domain names.

### Non-Goals
Automatic certificate rotation and integration with 3rd party cert issuing services.

## Proposal
Proposal suggests to provide Administrator means adding their own Certificates using microshift configuration file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).

A new `apiServer` level section will be added to the configuration called `namedCertificates`:

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.key
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.key
    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     
    - *.apps.external.com

```  
For each provided certificate, the following configuration is proposed:
1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
   If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.
1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,

> each certificate file will be validated (see validation rules).

Reviewer 8: Lets move those to a separate section, iiuc these are described now in "Failure Modes"?

therefore custom certificates will have to be validated against CAs in the RHEL Client trust store. 

Each certificate gets examined in order to determine if it's purely wildcard.
A certificate is considered to be purely wildcard only if there are no FQDN Entries found.
Certificate will be considered as a wildcard only if there are no FQDN Entries found.
The FQDN Address is searched in:
- Certificate Subject Alternative Name (SAN)
- names configuration value.

when a Certificate is found to be a wildcard only, Microshift will not be able to find the real FQDN, node IP Address will be placed inside its kubeconfig's `server` section.
this kubeconfig should be treated as an example only and its `server` section value should be changed to the real FQDN.

Certain values that configured in `names` field can cause  internal API communication issues  ie:127.0.0.1,localhost therefore we must not allow them.

### Workflow Description

#### Default API Certs
1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

#### when custom namedCertificates configured

> 1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host,files should be accessible by root only.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host, files should be accessible by root only.
```

1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL Client trust store on the client system.
1. Device Administrator configures `namedCertificates` in the Microshift configuration yaml file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).
1. Device Administrator start/restarts MicroShift
1. Check and validate the certificates see [Failure Modes](#failure-modes).
1. Microshift passes the certificates to the tls-sni-cert-key as apiserver command line option preceding all the other certificates.
1. kube-apiserver picks up the certificates and start serving them on the configured SNI.

### Topology Considerations
#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes
N/A

#### Standalone Clusters
N/A

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift
Enhancement is solely intended for MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> The certs will be prepended to the []configv1.NamedCertificate list before the api server is started. (it will be added to `-tls-sni-cert-key` flag)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The certs will be prepended to the `[]configv1.NamedCertificate` list before the api server is started. (it will be added to `-tls-sni-cert-key` flag)
```

This certificate paths configuration and names will be prepended into the kube-apiserver `tls-sni-cert-key` command line flag.
When the same SNI appears in the SAN part of the provided certs, this certificate will take precedence over the `default` external-signer. [ref](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/98358b8ce11b0c1878ae7aa1482668cb7a0b0e23/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/dynamiccertificates/named_certificates.go#L38)

### API Extensions
N/A

### Risks and Mitigations
* User provide certificate and it expired after some time.
  kube-api server will continue serving with an expired cert - similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

>   > users can mitigate this by using --insecure-skip-tls-verify client mode

Reviewer 9: Is this a mitigation that would be recommended in practice to real users?

Author: well, since the certificate is issued by the the actual client,we must provide some means to overcome its expiration.

* Users might configure certs with the wrong names that doesnt match the certificate SAN,but openShift allows it so we will too.
### Drawbacks
* External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 
  similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

## Design Details
N/A

## Open Questions [optional]
N/A

## Test Plan
add e2e test that will:
- generate and sign certificates with custom ca.
- change the default Microshift configuration to use the newly generated certs.
- make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.
- intentionally configure invalid value in `names` (ie: 127.0.0.1,localhost) , Microshift should ignore this configuration and skip this certificate.

## Graduation Criteria
### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Gather feedback from early adopters on possible issues.

### Tech Preview -> GA
- Extensive testing with various certificates variations.
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
N/A

## Version Skew Strategy
N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions
N/A

### Failure Modes

> The provided certs value will be validated before is it passed to the api-server flag

Reviewer 9: IIUC, cert and key files passed to `--tls-sni-cert-key` are watched and reloaded dynamically (via https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes/blob/352677df596e5dab4098898974e36df8bcd067e2/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/server/options/serving.go#L323). Is it worthwhile to perform the proposed validation once at startup?

OCP performs some validation before a configured cert and name reach that flag, but in that case the files being passed to the kube-apiserver process are operator-managed as opposed to being directly managed by the user, as in the Microshift case.

- https://github.com/openshift/kubernetes/blob/c3ad486c907cdf30ee97c9a7e7052a823a49c34b/openshift-kube-apiserver/admission/customresourcevalidation/apiserver/validate_apiserver.go#L54
- https://github.com/openshift/cluster-kube-apiserver-operator/blob/e6cba0a210714e935ac20c95873cc63e1175bb43/pkg/operator/configobservation/apiserver/observe_apiserver.go#L91

Reviewer: That validation to ensure the settings in the cert don't collide with the internal IPs of the cluster look valuable to avoid breaking the ability of pods to talk to the API server. Thanks for pointing those out, we had a hard time finding anything like that!

Author: added table with reserved IP/DNS values  which will be  cause the certificate to be ignored.

Reviewer 9: Do you plan to do anything to prevent the files at `certPath`/`keyPath` passing startup-time validation, being modified in such a way that they would fail startup-time validation, and then being dynamically reloaded at runtime? It's potentially surprising that changing `namedCertificates` in the config file has no effect until the next restart, but changes to the contents of files referenced in the config will be dynamically reloaded (unless I am misunderstanding how the `--tls-sni-cert-key` option works).

Reviewer: That does sound like a potentially bad hole that bypasses important validation.

Those conditions will cause Microshift to ignore certificates and log the error:
1. certificates files exists in the disk and readable by microshift process.

> 1. certificate should be parseable by[x509.ParseCertificate](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509#ParseCertificate).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. certificate should be parseable by [x509.ParseCertificate](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509#ParseCertificate).
```

> 1. certificate shouldnt override the internal local certificates which are managed internally.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. certificate shouldn't override the internal local certificates which are managed internally.
```

> This condition will cause Microshift to accept ths certificate with a warning in the logs.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This condition will cause Microshift to accept the certificate with a warning in the logs.
```

1. certificate is expired.

## Support Procedures
- Make sure that certificate is served by the kube-apiserver, verify that the certificate path is appended to the `--tls-sni-cert-key` FLAG

```shell
> journalctl -u microshift -b0 | grep tls-sni-cert-key

Jan 24 14:53:00 localhost.localdomain microshift[45313]: kube-apiserver I0124 14:53:00.649099   45313 flags.go:64] FLAG: --tls-sni-cert-key="[/home/eslutsky/dev/certs/server.crt,/home/eslutsky/dev/certs/server.key;/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-external-signer/kube-external-serving/server.crt,/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-external-signer/kube-external-serving/server.key;/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-localhost-signer/kube-apiserver-localhost-serving/server.crt,/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-localhost-signer/kube-apiserver-localhost-serving/server.key;/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-service-network-signer/kube-apiserver-service-network-serving/server.crt,/var/lib/microshift/certs/kube-apiserver-service-network-signer/kube-apiserver-service-network-serving/server.key
```

- Make sure the kube-apiserver is serving the correct certificate.

>    ```shell

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
```shell
```

   $ openssl s_client -connect <SNI_ADDRESS>:6443 -showcerts | openssl x509 -text -noout -in - | grep -C 1 "Alternative\|CN"

>    ```

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
```
```

## Implementation History
N/A

## Alternatives
- Use [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/) for managing Microshift external custom certs
 which allow MicroShift administrators to rotate certificates automatically (e.g. via ACME).

>  cert-manager is not supported on Microshift because it requires alot of internal API changes.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
 cert-manager is not supported on Microshift because it requires a lot of internal API changes.
```

    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     
    - *.apps.external.com

```  
For each provided certificate, the following configuration is proposed:
1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
   If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.
1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,
each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

because we dont want to disrupt the internal API communication and make sure the internal certificate will be automaticly renewed,
Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

InvalidNamedCertificatesPolicy parameter option is for security conscious users which would configure microshift to not start when the provided certificates are invalid (e.g. when they've been revoked, expired, etc.).
this enum field may contain the following values:
1. allow - allow to start Microshift with invalid certificates .

> 1. ignore (default) - ignore invalid certificates and allow to start Microshift (those certs will not be used).

Author: setting it to `refuse`  can cause a service disruption,  Microshift node with custom certs  been running for a long time and certificates become expired , so it wont start after reboot.

> 1. ignore (default) - ignore invalid certificates and allow to start Microshift (those certs will not be used).

Author: > Are we checking dates for custom certificates too? MicroShift does it with its own certs, is this something we are considering doing for warnings/errors?
> 
> MicroShift logs errors with the rotation dates, should we add a warning if any custom certs are approaching the `NotAfter` date?
> 
> ```shell
> Mar 11 14:48:52 microshift-dev microshift[1428]: ??? E0311 14:48:52.717936    1428 certchains.go:120] [kube-apiserver-external-signer kube-external-serving] rotate at: 2024-10-08 16:32:26 +0000 UTC
> ```
yes, we want to add this check, to determine if the certificate is considered as invalid.

> 1. ignore (default) - ignore invalid certificates and allow to start Microshift (those certs will not be used).

Author: as agreed in slack thread,  such  option can be a cause of   bricked  device (in  case is something wrong with the certificates),
we  check  if the Certificate can be read and parsed, in case of a  bad certificate it will be skipped and not passed on to the api-server.

### Drawbacks
* External certificate wont be automaticly renewed, so it requires manual Certificate rotation. 
  similiar approach is taken by OpenShift.

## Design Details
N/A

## Open Questions [optional]
N/A

## Test Plan
add e2e test that will:
- generate and sign certificates with custom ca.
- change the default Microshift configuration to use the newly generated certs.
- make sure system is functional using  generated external kubeconfig.
- intentionally configure invalid value in `names` (ie: 127.0.0.1,localhost) , Microshift should ignore this configuration and skip this certificate.

## Graduation Criteria
### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Gather feedback from early adopters on possible issues.

### Tech Preview -> GA
- Extensive testing with various certificates variations.
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
N/A

## Version Skew Strategy
N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions
N/A

### Failure Modes
The provided certs value will be validated before is it passed to the api-server flag

> Those conditions will cause Microshift to ignore certificates and log the error:
> 1. certificates files exists in the disk and readable by microshift process.
> 1. certificate should be parseable by [x509.ParseCertificate](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509#ParseCertificate).
> 1. certificate shouldn't override the internal certificates IPAddress/DNSNames in the SubjectAlternativeNames . see  [reserved](#reserved-names-values) names below.

Reviewer 4: A bit confused here about wording, can you confirm that what's in the suggestion is correct? That's how I interpreted this

```suggestion
Those conditions will cause Microshift to ignore certificates and exit with the error:
1. certificates files do not exist in the disk or are not readable by microshift process.
1. certificate is not parseable by [x509.ParseCertificate](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/x509#ParseCertificate).
1. certificate overrides the internal certificates IPAddress/DNSNames in the SubjectAlternativeNames . see  [reserved](#reserved-names-values) names below.
```

Author: well, the conditions corrections are correct, but Microshift will not Exit, it will just ignore the certificate with the log.

This condition will cause Microshift to accept the certificate with a warning in the logs.
1. certificate is expired.

### Reserved Names values
| Address                   | Type     | Comment         |
|:--------------------------|:---------|:----------------| 
| localhost                 |DNS       |                 |

> | 127.0.0.1                 |IPAddress |                 |

Reviewer 4: Do we need to add `::1` (ipv6)?

Author: do we  support IPv6 ?

Reviewer 4: Hmm, not sure, I don't think so

Reviewer: We have that on the roadmap, so let's try to avoid introducing any new places where we will have to do more work when it comes time to implementing it.

| 10.42.0.0                 |IPAddress | Cluster Network |

> | 10.43.0.0/16,10.44.0.0/16 |IPAddress | Service Network |

Reviewer 4: What about `169.254.169.2/29`? It's the IP on `br-ex`

  - N/A
creation-date: 2021-01-18
last-updated: 2023-01-18
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/USHIFT-2101
see-also:
  - microshift-apiserver-certs.md
replaces:
  - N/A
superseded-by:
  - N/A
---

# MicroShift API server custom external certificates
## Summary

This enhancement extends the Microshift apiserver Certs to allow the user to
provide additional custom certificates (e.g. signed by a 3rd party CA) for API server SSL handkshake and external authentication.

> Anytime the document mentions API server, it refers to kube API server.

## Motivation
Currently, users of Microshift cannot provide their own generated certificates,
Some customers have very strict requirements regarding TLS certs. There are frequently intermediate proxies which allow only TLS traffic with certs that are signed by organization owned CAs.

### User Stories
* As a MicroShift administrator, I want to be able to add  organization generated certificates. 
  - each certificate may contain:
    - Single Common Name containing The API server DNS/IPAddress or a wildcard entry (wildcard certificate).
    - Multiple Subject Alternative Names (SAN) containing the API server DNS/IPAddress.

> * As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate.

Author: it is additional names to  the Microshift config,  which is not inside the certificate content.

> * As a MicroShift administrator, I want to provide additional DNS names for each certificate.

Author: added comment

A new `apiServer` level section will be added to the configuration called `namedCertificates`:

```yaml
apiServer:
  namedCertificates:
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_1.key
  - certPath: ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.crt
    keyPath:  ~/certs/api_fqdn_2.key
    names:
    - api_fqdn_1     
    - *.apps.external.com

```  
For each provided certificate, the following configuration is proposed:
1. `names` - optional list of explicit DNS names (leading wildcards allowed).
   If no names are provided, the implicit names will be extracted from the certificates.
1. `certPath` -  certificate full path.
1. `keyPath` -   certificate key full path.

Certificate files will be read from their configured location by the Microshift service,
each certification file will be validated (see validation rules).

because we dont want to disrupt the internal API communication and make sure the internal certificate will be automaticly renewed,
Those certificate will extend the default  API server [external](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/controllers/kube-apiserver.go#L194) certificate configuration.

### Kubeconfig Generation

> Each configured certificate can contain multiple FQDN and wildcards values, for each unique FQDN address kubeconfig file will be generated on the filesystem.

Author: added that validation to `#Failure Modes`

Every generated `kubeconfig` for the custom certificates will omit the certificate-authority-data section,
therefore custom certificates will have to be validated against CAs in the RHEL Client trust store. 

each certificate will be examined and deteremined if its wildcard only.
certificate will be considered as a wildcard only if there are no FQDN Entries found.
the FQDN Address is searched in:
- Certificate CN
- Certificate Subject Alternative Name (SAN)
- names configuration value.

> when a Certificate found as a wildcard only , host public IP Address will be placed inside its kubeconfig's `server` section.

Reviewer 3: This is the node IP from the configuration, right?

Author: yes, if its not in the configuration it [guessed](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/etcd/vendor/github.com/openshift/microshift/pkg/config/config.go#L74)

Reviewer 3: If the config includes SANs those will also be added to the node ip?

Certain values that configured in `names` field can cause  internal API communication issues  ie:127.0.0.1,localhost therefore we must not allow them.

> when the `names` field is not contained in the certificate (ie: included in the wildcard),

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understand this section. If one of the `names` fields is not contained in the CN/SAN, then MicroShift should include it, right?
Or do you mean the `names` was not configured? If that was the case then the example below should not happen, as the kubeconfig is generated from available SANs (be those through configuration or default behavior).

Author: this section actually doesnt belong to kubeconfig generation,
its more  a `Support Procedures` ,  the problem  with `names` configuration that it doesn't replace the SNI inside certificate that is used for TLS  validation. its more  extension to  the certificates.

Author: @dhellmann ,  suggested we dont perform any clever validations here, since its the way it works in OCP.

Reviewer 3: If its an extension then is it automatically added to the names in the cert? If so the first case I described can not happen. If it is already included it should not hurt, right?

subject=C = il, ST = il, L = , O = , OU = , CN = 192.168.2.130
issuer=CN = 192.168.2.130
notAfter=May 27 14:45:13 2051 GMT
X509v3 Subject Alternative Name: 
    DNS:api.example.com, DNS:localhost.localdomain, DNS:192.168.2.130, IP Address:192.168.2.130
```

while kubeconfig on the client contains:
```
> cat kubeconfig | grep server

server: https://example.com:6443
```
but rejected by the oc client:
```
> oc get pods

tls: failed to verify certificate: x509: certificate is valid for api.example.com, localhost.localdomain, not test.com
```

### Workflow Description

#### Default API Certs
1. By default, when there is no namedCertificates configuration the behaviour will remain the same.

#### when custom namedCertificates configured
1. Device Administrator copies the certificated to MicroShift host
1. Device Administrator configures additonal CAs in the RHEL Client trust store on the client system.
1. Device Administrator configures `namedCertificates` in the Microshift configuration yaml file (/etc/microshift/config.yaml).
1. Device Administrator start/restarts MicroShift

> 1. During startup, Microshift will check and validate the certificates paths. in case of an error service will produce clear error log and if the file is missing it will exit.

Author: we specify that in  `#failure-modes` , i provided  a link to avoid duplication.
